---
title: "So you wanna write a post-apocalypse story"
date: 2021-03-01
---

So you wanna write a post-apocalypse story. Let's make sure you get the
demographics right.

Suppose your apocalyptic event—flu, comet, zombies—kills 99% of all
humans alive. With the global population currently at about 8 billion,
that means you're down to 80 million people. That may sound like a lot
of survivors, but it's not. The total landmass of planet Earth is about
58 million square miles, so the population density would be less than
1.4 people per square mile. That's about one-fourth the population
density of modern-day Mongolia. Mongolia ranks last out of 194 countries
in population density.

But that's only the initial killing event. Let's suppose each apocalypse
survivor murders one other person, or is murdered. Violence sells, after
all. Who wants to read a book about people cooperating heroically during
extreme circumstances?—other than the millions of readers who loved _The
Martian_, by Andy Weir. Anyway, a global round of single homicides cuts
the population in half, to 40 million, and to a population density of
about 0.7 people per square mile. That's about the same density as the
Falkland Islands.

But these stories never stop with only one murder! Oh no. Every
character has a backstory full of close calls with death, where they've
taken out _many_ would-be murderers by shooting, stabbing, or slashing
first. Unfortunately, multi-homicides and serial killers make the math
harder because we must account for the victims themselves having
murdered one or more people before succumbing. A simple model would be a
single-elimination tournament bracket. In the first round, half of
everyone is a murderer, and the other half are victims. In round two,
it's the same, with the survivors of round two being twice-over killers
and the losers being once-over killers. And on and on you go, deeper
into the bracket of death, until you reach the average number of murders
a long-term survivor has committed. How deep should your bracket go?

Let's say that, on average, each long-term survivor murders four other
people, thus putting us four rounds deep into the single-elimination
bracket. This would put the population at one-sixteenth the original
apocalypse population, or about 5 million people in all. The last time
planet Earth had this few people was six thousand years ago—a thousand
years before the bronze age. In terms of population density, this is
about 0.09 people per square mile, or about the same density as
Greenland, the least populated place on Earth. But unlike Greenland,
your post-apocalyptic world isn't 80% covered in ice—unless, of course,
_ice age_ is your apocalyptic event.

In any case, the post-apocalyptic world is sparse. We may suppose there
would be an outburst of violence immediately following the apocalyptic
event whereby everyone is fighting over the last Twinkies and other
important stuff, but things would quickly stabilize to where there would
be more land than the survivors would know what to do with—and certainly
more land than the people could control. People wouldn't unwillingly
bump into each other very often, and those that do and who are
unfriendly would be better off fleeing somewhere else and avoiding
confrontation than to risk a violent outcome. But that wouldn't make for
the dramatic story modern-day peaceful people want to read.

