---
title: "Getting heart rate right"
date: 2021-02-01
tags: ["health", "fitness"]
---

Nearly all advice I've read about using heart rate for exercise is
wrong. In this post I'll share some of my opinions, which may also be
wrong, but that I think are less wrong.

1. Heart rate monitoring makes sense only in the context of subtracting
out resting heart rate. For example, if you have a resting heart rate of
50bpm and a maximum heart rate of 170bpm, then you have an *maximum
heart rate range* of 120bpm (170bpm - 50bpm). If your aerobic threshold
heart rate is 155bpm, then you have an *aerobic heart rate range* of
105bpm (155bpm - 50bpm). Any heart rate that's expressed as a percentage
should be a percentage of one of these two values. For example, 75% of
aerobic threshold would be 79bpm (0.75 × 105bpm), which, after we add
back the resting heart rate of 50bpm, results in an actual heart rate of
*129bpm* (79bpm + 50bpm). That would be your 75% aerobic heart rate.
+
It doesn't makes sense to advise using X% of maximum heart rate, or X%
of threshold heart rate, because both of those values fail to account
for the discrepancies between different people's resting heart rate. For
example, if two people both have an aerobic threshold heart rate of
160bpm, but one has a resting heart rate of 40bpm and the other has a
resting heart rate of 60bpm, then the two people will have very
different aerobic heart rate zones. The reason for this is related to my
next point.

2. Your aerobic heart rate range linearly correlates with power
output--generally speaking. You can track this firsthand on a bicycle
with a power meter, but it also applies to running and other aerobic
activities. For example, you can track your stable heart rate at
different running paces and then use a running power estimator (such as
https://www.alancouzens.com/blog/Run_Power.html[this one]) to see a
linear increase in power as heart rate increases. For example, your
running power should be about 20% higher at 78% of your aerobic heart
rate than it is at 65% of your aerobic heart rate (because 78% is 20%
more than 65%).

3. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardiovascular_drift[Cardiac drift]
messes up these percentages. Cardiac drift also messes up resting heart
rate. It might be true that the linear correlation between heart rate
and power holds during cardiac drift after accounting for the new,
higher resting heart rate, but that's only speculation. In any case, it
wouldn't be terribly useful as it's impractical to get an accurate
reading for the new resting heart rate during exercise. So cardiac drift
is something that needs to be accounted for, and I'm still trying to
figure that out.

My takeaway advice from all this is to scrap published heart rate zones
that say things such as “80% of max heart rate” and instead use the
https://www.trainingpeaks.com/blog/power-training-levels/[standard
seven-zone model based on power], then correlate the power numbers to
heart rates when you don't have access to a power meter, such as when
running. (Never mind the heart rate percentages specified in that
link—the article gets it wrong, too.) For example, the top of zone 2 is
75% of threshold power, so it correlates to 75% of the threshold heart
rate range.

