---
title: "Recovery"
date: 2021-02-24
---

After breaking my hip a little more than two months ago, I'm still
limited to walking and biking as my only two activities—along with
physical therapy stuff, which doesn't count because it's not fun.

Back in January, as soon as I felt good enough to get on the bike, I
did, for a twenty-minute ride. Mounting and dismounting were the hard
parts; pedaling felt fine. Also, let's assume I have a trainer and used
it, because biking on the roads with a two-week-old broken femur would
have been really stupid. Laura would have been justified in giving me
grief had I done so, but of course she didn't because I didn't and not
because she's awesomely supportive.

I started that first day on the bike at twenty minutes and added about
five minutes each day. I missed only two days, on an account of rain,
which is weird considering I was safely indoors on the trainer. Anyway,
after two weeks I had built up to about an hour-and-a-half, and within
two more weeks I had started a goal of riding at least two hours each
day. That streak is now at twenty days. In miles, 890. Total moving
time, 55 hours. I don't remember having ever biked this much over a
three week period—not even when I biked to and from work every day while
doing group rides and biking my errands.

I've also never biked this slow. No group rides. Almost no
high-intensity work. Slowing to a crawl when going up hills. It's weird
feeling fatigue from easy efforts alone. I'm trying to gauge my fitness,
but it's hard to measure without the hard efforts. Is all this riding
making me fitter? How would I know? I'm left looking at indirect
markers, such as resting rate going down and wattage at such-and-such
heart rate going up. But there's so much noise in these things from
day-to-day that it's hard to tell.

In two days the streak will be at risk due to scheduling. Probably I
would benefit from the rest, but I'm enjoying the experiment so much I
would like to keep it going.

