---
title: "Rinse and repeat"
date: 2021-01-11
---

In April of last year, still in the early days of the pandemic, I quit
using soap in the shower. Because of the social distancing going on at
the time, there would be no better opportunity to try the experiment.
But now, with the hindsight of knowing how trouble-free the experience
was, I wish I had quit soap much sooner. I wish I never started using
soap in the first place.

First, if this sounds like it's coming out of left field, understand
there's a no-soap health movement going on. The theory is that some of the
stuff that makes up healthy skin gets dissolved and washed away when
using soap and that we're better off—or so the theory goes—keeping that
healthy stuff in place. This is analogous to the probiotic and
anti-antibiotic health movement, where the goal is to nurture a diverse
gut biome. The no-soap goal is to nurture a diverse skin biome.

What does showering entail if there's no soap? The answer is showering
becomes a quick rinse-off. For me, I turn on the water and stand in its
stream for a few minutes. I use my bare hands to do some light rubbing,
but mainly I stand there, twisting a bit here and there to effect
different angles with the stream. Then I turn off the water and towel
off.

The first time I tried the no-soap technique, I noticed the difference
right away in that I didn't _feel clean_. Instead, my skin felt
sticky—similar to how it felt before getting into the shower. But the
stickiness went away as I toweled off. By the time I was dry, I felt
clean. Like magic.

I heard about the no-soap movement a few years prior and read many
accounts where people raved about it, but I waited until the pandemic to
try it because I had been told to expect a few weeks for my body to
adjust, during which my skin might overreact to the lack of soap and
cause some unpleasant side effects. But for me there was no overreaction
and the improvement was immediate and total—hence my regret for not
trying this sooner.

A few more notes:

_Do I still use soap when washing my hands?_ Yes. The no-soap thing
isn't dogma, and hands are an obvious exception. Also, if, for example,
I got a thick grease stain on my leg, I would use soap to remove the
stain. Grease isn't water soluble, so the alternative would be to wait
a couple weeks for the grease to slough off with the skin. Whereas,
nearly all of the ordinary stuff that causes body odor is water soluble,
so a rinse-off is all that's needed for ordinary washing.

_Do I use shampoo?_ I still occasionally wash my hair with shampoo—maybe
about once a month. It helps to get the dust out of the hair, but so
does brushing. Overall, I'm still undecided on the shampoo thing and
figure infrequent shampooing is a good compromise for now.

_Do I shower more or less frequently now?_ It depends. I showered more
frequently in the summer because a cold rinse-off is quick and feels
good. In the winter, I've showered less. One difference I've noticed
after quitting soap is that I become dirty more slowly—probably a direct
consequence of having a more stable skin biome.

_Do I have any future plans with this_ Not really. My only remaining
goal with respect to the no-soap thing is to do some more research to
better understand exactly what's going on when using or not using soap.

